Good day i'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to carry on with this new framework for linear
algebra and matrix algebra so we've been talking
about pixels and Maxwell's a pixel is something
like this it's a list of two natural numbers
and a Maxwell is something like this it's a
multi set of pixels and last time we introduced
the multiplication of pixels that KL times MN
is the pixel kN provided that l equals m and
is otherwise empty or blank and then we saw
that this naturally extends to a multiplication
of maxwell's that we can then take this pixel
multiplication and create a multiplication of Max
loss out of it so for example this Max will here
consisting of these three pixels times this max
all consisting of these two pixels is this max'll
with these three pixels and the way we get that is
we take each of these pixels in this first multi
set and multiply them with each of the pixels in
the second set all possible combinations and put
all of those combinations together in a multi
set so 1 1 times 1 3 is 1 3 1 1 times 2 7 is
the empty object so it doesn't appear at all
doesn't make any contribution then 1 1 times
1 3 gives us another 1 3 we have to put every
element in with the correct multiplicity here
1 1 times 2 7 again gives us nothing 4 2 times
this gives us nothing and 4 2 times 2 7 gives
us 4 7 so we get then a very interesting enriched
structure this realm of maxwell's that we talked
about last time with the operations of addition
union and intersection is now augmented with this
new operation of multiplication which gives it
a very rich structure which has huge amounts of
implications and applications to mathematics so in
today's video we want to establish some additional
aspects and notation centered around this
multiplication of maxwell's so our first theorem
is the distributive law which tells us that form
axles m and an oh that m times n plus all equals
m n plus m o and M plus n times R equals M o plus
n oh so this is actually a general consequence of
the fact that our multiplication of maxwell's
is multi set analog of a multiplication at the
fundamental level the objects so for example
suppose that M was a multi set with elements
a B and was multi set with elements C D and always
a multi set with element E and we could be rather
general these could be pixels in a Maxell or
they could be other kinds of objects in some
other kind of multi set now what we add these two
m sets we know that what happens is that they just
form a bigger M set combining all of the elements
with the appropriate multiplicities so we get CDE
and then the product of these two M sets is well
in terms of the multiplication of the individual
objects ac together with AD IE b c BD b all
possible products of these guys with these guys
and now if we look at this well we can rearrange
it a little bit AC ad BC BD and then moving the AE
over here B and that way we can separate this
into the first four is a B times C D because
that's a C ad BC and BD there and then the last
two is the same as a B times e because there's
an A E and a B D so this illustrates that it's a
very general consequence of the fact that we're
working with multi sets here so the vector space
structure of the multisets is kind of given to us
automatically and if we have a multiplication of
the objects in the m sets then we automatically
have a distributive a lot in this nature ok so
along very similar lines to the previous one we
have an associative law that form axles and matter
than oh we have MN times o equals M times n oh
this is a very important law ok it's the analog in
this Maxwell situation of the associative law of
multiplication for matrices and that's a rather
subtle business here in this situation we can
see it as a very general consequence of the fact
that our multiplication of pixels upon which our M
set multiplication rests is itself associative
so there's a general consequence of having an
M set multiplication defined by an associative
multiplication of its elements so let me again
give you an illustration of the argument without
sort of laying out the whole thing in gory detail
so I hope this capture is the reason why this
works in great generality so it doesn't really
depend on the particular nature of our pixel
multiplication it only depends on the fact
that we know that it's associative okay so for
example here's one M set M which is a B another
M set hand which is C D and oh is this one here if
we multiply these two we get the M set AC ad BC VD
all possible products here now when we multiply
by the M set e there we get all possible products
between these guys and this one so we get AC
times e ad times e BC times E and B T times e
ok now the crucial step is to go from here to here
which is to use the fact that we're assuming that
the underlying multiplication of these objects
whatever they are is itself associative so that
this a C times e can be re-written as a times c
e and similarly for these other ones they can all
be written alternate fashion exactly like that
and when we write it like this then we see that
we can rewrite that as a b times c de because
here's a times c e and here's a times de and
then B times C EO here and then B times de over
here and then once we've done that we recognize
that this is well there's the first one which
was M and then C e times D is just the product
of these two so this illustrates the argument in a
particular case but if we made these M sets bigger
by adding more elements nothing essentially
changes it's exactly the same argument and
it's independent of the particular nature of the
multiplication just what's required is that it's
an associative multiplication at the level of the
objects now we're going to exploit the fact that
we're working with multi sets in another way by
identifying some very important Maxim's which are
particularly simple and small we're to call these
one Maxwell's so what is that well a Maxell with
just one pixel as a single element in other words
with multiplicity one is going to be called a1
Maxell so for example this thing here is a1 Maxell
there's a single pixel MN inside it and it's some
M set consisting of that single pixel MN and we're
going to give this kind of maximal a particular
name notation we're to call it e m comma n so e
MN is just the max all consisting of the single
pixel MN so example 11 12 is this Maxell if 14 -
is that Maxell III four is that one at e1 one is
that one now every non-empty Maxell is a linear
combination of one maxwell's so here is a maxim
3 5 1 1 3 2 14 8 1 1 1 1 3 2 remember when we have
a multi set we can use our linear structure that
multi sets naturally come with we can rewrite
this as 3 times the multi set consisting of 1
1 because the 1 1 appears three times plus two
times the multi set consisting of 3 2 because
3 2 appears twice and the multi set consisting
of just 3 5 and the multi set consisting of just
14 8 so we then can use these sort of singleton
Maxwell's as building blocks to build up more
general Maxwell's via linear combinations
very similar to the kinds of things that we
were doing when we were talking about multi sets
of natural numbers except here we have some sort
of particular notation that makes it a little
bit easier for us to to write that down so we
don't have to write lots of brackets inside other
brackets and this will also be more in line with
a kind of a matrix point of view so from a matrix
point of view something like III - what represent
matrix which is mostly all zeros and just has a
single one at the 3/2 position but it's really
a bit more than that because it's not a matrix
of a particular size this Maxell doesn't have
a specified size it just lives in the world of
Mac Sol and like it's an occupant of the screen
and the screen extends beyond our view so it's a
little bit different but it's definitely analogous
to sort of familiar matrix kind of notation
this proposition gives us an alternative way of
writing down our basic multiplication of pixels
at the level of one Maxwell's so we've talked
about what one makes Liz these very simple basic
kinds of Maxwell's with just one pixel and now
the product of two such things is going to be
given by essentially the same rule as the rule
for the underlying pixels which it contains so
ekl times the MN is going to be e KN if l equals
m and otherwise otherwise it's going to be what
we're denoting by capital o which is the empty
or a zero Maxell so when we multiplied pixels
if we multiply the pixel KL with the pixel MN
then if L does not equal n we saw that we got just
emptiness there but here we're talking about multi
sets containing those pixels so when we take the
product in that case we would get a multiset with
an emptiness inside it well that actually is a
legitimate object and a familiar object in our
world it's our empty max'll so this form of the
pixel multiplication might be more comfortable
for you in the sense that now there really is
something that's occupying dispositions not just
a blank which was rather a novelty for us wasn't
it in the last video so for example otherwise it's
very familiar so e1 3 times e3 4 equals 1 for the
3ds it's there are common so that we had getting
something that's non-empty and what we're getting
is just the outside ones e 2 1 times e 3 1 here
the inner ones are not equal so we're getting
the empty Maxell III four times e 1 3 also the
empty Maxell and note in particular that Maxell
multiplication is generally not commutative for
example e 1 3 times e 3 4 is not equal to e
3 4 e 1 3 so that's an obvious but important
thing to note that our maximum multiplication is
not in general commutative and then well we can
do multiplication at the level of these linear
combinations so we don't always have to write
out now our max holes with all these brackets we
can write things in this form so this is another
way of writing a Maxell 3 e times e 1 1 plus 5
e 1 2 plus e 4 2 multiplied by e 1 7 plus e 2
3 so we can do the multiplication now just using
the same rule so if this times this that'll be 3
e 1 7 this times this doesn't give us anything
this times this will be 5 e 1 know this times
this doesn't give us anything but this times this
gives us 5 e 1 3 this times this doesn't give us
anything this times this gives us e 4 3 now let's
move closer to connecting Maxell arithmetic with
matrix arithmetic by showing you how to display
Maxwell's on our screen so remember that in this
subject we're using the word screen rather in a
precise way we're talking about this framework
here of positions on a two-dimensional diagram
starting with 1 1 here in the top corner and then
1 2 1 3 and so on that 2 1 2 2 2 3 and so on so
this is going to be the screen notice also that
I've underlined in red the diagonal elements they
are particularly important in the theory and will
often be useful for us to keep in mind where the
diagonal elements are right so what we want to do
now is we want to take a Maxell like this one here
1 1 1 1 3 3 1 4 2 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 which can also be
written in our sort of multiplicity form terms
of these e1 ones these 1 Maxell x' there's 2 1
1 so that's 2 times e1 1 plus e2 1 that's that
1 plus e1 4 that's one plus three e three two
one two three what about e3 three but include
that one as well plus e3 three okay and so now
we're going to display that I can see that we're
going to have to augment our display what we're
going to do is we're going to record the various
multiplicities of our one Maxell x' on the screen
so this two which is in the one one spot tells
us that our Maxell has two one ones there are no
one twos there are no one 3s there's a one four
there it is there there is a two one yes no two
twos no two threes no two fours etc there's no
three one there's a three - like there's three
of them so there's a multiplicity there of three
and there's also that III three that I need to
add so we'll put it there as well now we could
also say well there's also zero three four so
we can add a zero there in fact we could add a
lot more zero so we could then say well there's
also zero four ones and 0 4 2 s and so on so
this display of em is not entirely unique in
the sense that we can always add more zeros below
or to the right of whatever we have nevertheless
this is getting pretty close to a matrix kind
of object that is encoding our Maxell and sort
of connecting things with a two-dimensional table
of numbers so when we're representing mac soles
on the screen it will be important for us to
have some notation an understanding of regions
of the screen so we want to talk about regions
of the screen in terms of sets sets of pixels so
there's a bit of an interplay here between multi
sets of pixels and sets of pixels so can we see
the advantage and having rather clear distinction
in our minds between these various types of data
structures and when it's appropriate to use one
kind and when it's appropriate to use some other
kind and being flexible but still having these
various possibilities of hands very important
okay so we have seen already that in general
if we have a set like a and the set four seven
one that we can associate to that an M set a say
sub M equals four seven one just by replacing the
braces with square brackets now we'll observe
that there's also a way of going from an M set
to a set which is very very natural that we can
associate to an M set M let's just say an M set
of natural numbers is actually an M set from five
the M set three three four four or five one five
we can associate to that the set s three four
five one which contains the elements of M but
exactly only once that is where we've removed all
multiplicities reduced all the multiplicities down
to just one so instead of having two threes now
we only have one three two fours there's only one
for two fives is only one five one one and we're
going to give that a name we're to say that this
set s obtained from the M set M is the support of
M and we'll use this notation s UPP standing for
support so support of M equals s so that's a very
general kind of thing that we can do whenever we
have M sets of any kind we can always reduce the
multiplicity he's down to one or zero then and
then we get a set until we can change our brackets
into braces accordingly so that we register the
fact that we have a set okay now let's go back
to the framework of maxwell's and pixels we're
going to introduce this idea that a set of pixels
is now called a frame we've talked about an M set
of pixels we call that a Maxell so we just have a
set of pixels we're going to call that a frame and
that terminology has sort of been chosen so that
it fits in with our source screen view of what's
going on here so if M is a Maxell then the support
of M will be denoted F of M or sup of M so the
maximum is by definition of multi set of pixels
so it's support will be a set of pixels a set of
pixels is what we're calling a frame so it makes
sense to say that this is the frame of M give it
a Maxell m it's support is F of M the frame of M
so let's have a look at an example here is a max
well M 2 1 2 1 2 2 3 1 3 3 3 3 what is it support
it support is what we get when we form a set where
all of these elements here just replaced with a
single fellow so 2 1 it's a single - 1 2 - there
it is 3 1 and the 2 3 3 is replaced with a single
3 3 now here is a display of M we have agreed that
we can represent this Maxell with this sort of
list of multiplicities but it's a kind of a two
dimensional list because this is a two-dimensional
situation so we have two two ones we have a single
two - we have a single three one we a pair of
three threes so this is a display of em and now
over here to the same screen but now I'm just
showing you the regions of the screen over here
is a picture of the frame of M that's just the
underlying set of pixels that are represented
by nonzero multiplicities over here so here here
here and here we have nonzero multiplicities so
the corresponding frame is this set of pixels
it's this one up here but we can visualize that
set in terms of this region so just by drawing
your region on the screen we exhibit this frame
so we can visualize the frame F of M as a shaded
region in the empty screen I'm axel and it's frame
so regions in the screen or these frames will
become important for us there will be intimate
connection between the algebra of matrices or
the algebra of these Maxwell's and the geometry
of regions in the screen as we'll see and if you
do a lot of matrix calculations becoming familiar
with this geometry is quite important so to have
a few definitions about the kinds of frames that
are appearing is useful so here are some important
kinds of frames that figure naturally so this kind
of frame which is just a rectangle a rectangle in
the screen so here's a rectangle 2 this way 3 that
way we'll call that a box frame or maybe rectangle
frame a box is simpler okay so that's a box frame
then let's refer to the special case where that
box is adjusted so that aligns with the top and
the left-hand side so it actually is touching
that corner I'll call that a corner box frame
let's say these kinds of frames are particularly
important for us because they're not surely going
to be the frameworks for matrices a matrix is just
going to be sort of filling of a particular frame
corresponding to a maxim well occasionally we'll
have use for other kinds of frames made a little
bit more sophisticated so for example of somewhat
more advanced topic this is a tableau frame it's
like a corner box frame but there's a union of
them so it's my definition a union of corner box
frames so it's something that sort of wanders
around like this you can see there's one corner
box there and one there and one there together
they form this frame which we could call a tableau
or tableau frame and then another frame that will
be useful for us rather more specialized one is a
frame just with four elements where we've picked
two rows and we've picked two columns and those
two rows and two columns determine four pixels
so that set of four pixels is a four frame and
we'll see also that that's a useful notion great
so we've got some familiarity now with a basic
algebra of Maxwell's and some of the connections
with the geometry of the screen we want to go a
little bit further now and develop some more
intuition as to how the multiplication really
works this is actually very useful hands-on kind
of technology that's important when you're doing
linear algebra when you're doing linear algebra
you end up multiplying matrices a lot and to have
a good feeling for how matrices multiply is really
what we're after here except we're kind of having
a bigger view of that whole story with this Maxell
arithmetic so that's we're going to do next time
is to develop our geometrical feeling for how
multiplication of maxwell's looks like in our
screen frame orientation hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildbergers thanks for listening